# Sedimentation
The improved performance is due to 3 factors. First, the inlet manifold has a diffuser system that straightens the fluid jets that are exiting the manifold so that they have no horizontal velocity component. This is critical because even a small horizontal velocity causes a large scale circulation that transports flocs directly to the top of the sedimentation tank. Inlet manifolds without flow straightening diffusers are commonly used in vertical flow sedimentation tanks including designs by leading competitors.
Second, the diffusers create a line jet that spans the entire length of the sedimentation tank. The line jet enters a jet reverser and the vertical upward jet momentum is used to resuspend flocs that have settled to the bottom of the sedimentation tank. The resuspended flocs form a fluidized bed (floc blanket) with a suspended solids concentrations of approximately 1-5 g/L. The high concentration of particles leads to an increase in collisions and particle aggregation. The floc blanket reduces settled water turbidity by a factor of 10 (Garland et al., 2017) and provides two additional benefits. The floc blanket creates a uniform vertical velocity of water entering the plate settlers and the floc blanket transports excess flocs to a floc hopper for final removal by opening a small drain valve.
Third, the bottom geometry is shaped so that all flocs that settle are transported to the jet reverser. Thus there is no accumulation of settled flocs in the main sedimentation basin. Sludge that is allowed to accumulate in the bottom of sedimentation tanks in tropical and temperate decomposes anaerobically and generates methane. The methane forms gas bubbles that carry suspended solids to the top of the sedimentation tank and cause a reduction in particle removal efficiency.  The AguaClara sedimentation tank bottom geometry prevents sludge accumulation.
The hydraulic self cleaning sedimentation tank with a high performing floc blanket, zero sludge accumulation, and with no moving parts outperforms conventional sedimentation tanks on capital cost, performance, and maintenance costs. Mechanical sludge removal systems are well known to be costly to install and a challenge to maintain.

## Floc blankets

See the [Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) manual on theory of rapid sand filtration plants](http://bibliotecavirtual.minam.gob.pe/biam/bitstream/id/5657/BIV00012.pdf) (page 289) for reasons why floc blankets should not be used! According to PAHO floc blankets are not recommended for small communities who lack highly trained personal to operate the plant and floc blanket should only be used where plant flow rates and water quality are constant. Each of these constraints was due to the inadequate design of previous floc blanket reactors that made operation difficult.

###Floc blanket hypotheses
The floc blanket mechanism responsible for reduced settled water turbidity has been elusive. 
- not flocculation between particles delivered from the flocculator because $G\theta$ generated by the shear of the settling flocs and the hydraulic residence time of the floc blanket is insufficient to cause significant
- The floc blanket consists of settling flocs that are maintained in suspension by the upwardly flowing water. The water velocity
## Floc Hopper

## Plate settlers

## Manifold Hydraulics
